---
title: Surviving Your First Week In Vim
layout: post
---

As I've [written
previously](http://robots.thoughtbot.com/post/13164810557/the-vim-learning-curve-is-a-myth),
people often avoid learning vim because they're afraid of the effort involved.

For those who have been afraid, I come bearing good news: vim's learning curve
has been greatly exaggerated. You are fully capable of acquiring the basics in
just 30 minutes, and you'll be fairly proficient after only a week. After just
three weeks, most people are significantly faster than they were in their old
editor. Don't put off learning this awesome tool any longer.

Here are a few tips that will ensure that your attempt is successful:

### Begin with vimtutor.

Open up a shell and type _vimtutor_. This will launch vim with a tutorial
loaded that will teach you vim from the absolute ground up. The tutorial takes
about 30 minutes, and when you're done, you'll be familiar with the rudiments
of the editor: creating and opening files, making changes, saving those
changes, etc. You'll also have been exposed to powerful concept that is vim's
modal editing, and the powerful composability of its commands.

I've taught vim to a lot of people, and have had great success with this as
first step.

### Now stay in the gosh-darn editor.

Experienced vim users try to do all their text editing in vim. And for this
first week, you're going to pretend you're one of them. If you're writing text
of any kind, do it in vim.

The first hundred vim commands you execute will be your most painful, so get
through them as quickly as possible. Don't leave vim except in major
emergencies.

### Find an easily-accessible friend who can answer questions.

The second-hardest part of your first week in vim will be the dozens of
questions that will pop into your head as you use the editor. The ideal way to
handle this is a quickly-accessible guru who can answer your queries. Ideally
this person sits next to you. Next best is if they're available through a
low-latency protocol like Campfire or irc. If you don't have a suitable friend,
you can fall back to Stack Overflow or check out #vim on freenode. If all that
fails, [give me a shout on twitter](http://twitter.com/r00k) and I'll help you
out.

### Use a cheat sheet.

You'll want two of these, actually. The first should be a comprehensive list of
what all the keys do, [this one is
fantastic](http://www.viemu.com/a_vi_vim_graphical_cheat_sheet_tutorial.html).
For your second sheet, write down the 5 plus-or-minus 2 commands you're
specifically trying to memorize right now. Print these out and have them within
grabbing distance.

### Don't give up.

This is not beyond you. Things like weaning an arrow key addiction is brutally
hard at first, but becomes completely automatic very quickly. Thousands of
people have gotten blazing fast with this editor, and you can join them if you
like. It's worth it; I promise.
